TTYG-178 Improve documentation (#51)
Ontotext-AD/graphrag-eval: docs/steps.md

# Steps evaluation

If a reference answer specifies reference steps and the target answer specifies
the actual steps taken by the target agent, then the library tries to match
steps in the two sets and computes match scores (Section
[Steps matching](#steps-matching)). It outputs the matches and an overall

> `steps_score` for the question (Section [Steps scpre][#steps-score]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`steps_score` for the question (Section [Steps score][#steps-score]).
```

Reviewer: Also, the link is dead ..

Author: Fixed

|  |  |                |  |                  |                   |
|  +--|----------------+  |                  |                   |
|      \                  |                  |                   |
|       +--------------------- matches-------------> Step A      |
|                         |                  |                   |
|  +------Group 2------+  |                  |                   |
|  |    (unordered)    |  |                  |                   |
|  |                   |  |                  |                   |
|  |       Step C <------------matches-------------> Step C      |
|  |                   |  |                  |                   |
|  +-------------------+  |                  +-------------------+
+-------------------------+                  
```

## Steps matching

The library tries to match steps in reference groups to actual steps, such that:

- Each reference step matches a unique actual step
- The actual step was successful (i.e., it didn’t result in an error)
- The actual step occurred before all steps matching later groups
- (Within a reference group, actual steps can be matched regardless of the

> order in which they were executed)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Within a reference group, actual steps can be matched regardless of the
order in which they were executed
```

Author: Is this better?

 
The matching algorithm is as follows:

- Examine reference groups and actual steps in reverse order
- If all steps in the group are matched, then proceed to the previous group,
matching actual steps executed before the earliest actual step already matched
for the current group.
- If some steps in the group are not matched, then stop matching and compute
the score from the matches found so far.

The output contains the reference groups where each step that has a matching
actual step, the actual step's ID is keyed by the additional key `matches`.

> ## Match score

Reviewer: What's the relation between `match score` and `steps score`? It's a bit confusing that we define a match score, and don't define what's the relation between the two.

Author: Added mention of `steps_score` here and of match score in subsection Steps score. Is this good?

The match score quantifies how well a reference step aligns with an actual
step. Scores are 0 (no match) or 1 (full match), except for "retrieval" steps,
where scores range between 0 and 1. A score greater than 0 indicates at least
a partial match.

The match score of a reference step to an actual step is computed by following
these rules in order:

- if both steps are named `sparql_query` and the reference step's
`output_media_type` is `application/sparql-results+json`:
  - match score = [SPARQL queries comparison](#sparql-queries-comparison)
- if both steps are named `retrieval` and the reference step has key `output`:

>   - match score = [recall@k](retrieval-ids.md#recall-k)

Reviewer: the link is dead, no such section recall-k in retrieval-ids.md

Author: Fixed

>   - match score = [recall@k](retrieval-ids.md#context-recall-k)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - match score = [recall@k](retrieval-ids.md#context-recallk)
```

Author: Thanks, fixed

- if both steps are named `retrieve_time_series`:
  - match score = 1 if the steps have the same sets of arguments, otherwise 0
- if both steps are named `retrieve_data_points`:
  - match score = 1 if the steps have the same sets of arguments, otherwise 0
- if the reference step name is `iri_discovery` and the actual step name is 
`autocomplete_search`:
  - match score = 1 if the reference (`iri_discovery`) `output` (an IRI)
  is present in the actual (`autocomplete_search`) step `output`, otherwise 0
- if the step names are the same and the reference step `output_media_type` is
  `application/json`:
  - match score = 1 if the json outputs are identical, otherwise 0
- match score = 1 if the outputs are identical, otherwise 0

## SPARQL queries comparison

To check whether an actual SPARQL query matches a reference SPARQL query, we
compare their results. This does not work for certain types of queries:

- If one query is SELECT or ASK and the other is a DESCRIBE or CONSTRUCT, they
do not match (the score is 0).

> For all other queries, we compare their results as follows:

Reviewer: This needs to be rephrased as it leaves the impression that we can compare DESCRIBE query with another DESCRIBE query. We don't. We compare SELECT and ASK queries.

Author: From the code, the original sentence and your comment above I still do not understand how it works. How should we phrase it?

Reviewer: So, first **both step names needs to be "sparql_query"**. 

If reference_output_media_type is not "application/sparql-results+json" (this can happen if the query is DESCRIBE/CONSTRUCT, but also if there is a "bug", because the results can be serialized also as csv, tsv, SPARQL XML, binary RDF, but we expect sparql-results+json), we fall back to `float(reference_output == actual_output)`, which means we compare the RDF from the reference query with the output from the actual query. If the actual query is SELECT/ASK, this will fail (score = 0). If it's DESCRIBE/CONSTRUCT, it will also most probably fail (the possibility for a match is very low), because RDFs are not compared as strings. In the future we need to add logic to compare the statements, if the actual query is DESCRIBE/CONSTRUCT. 
So, as of now, if the **reference query is DESCRIBE/CONSTRUCT or the results are not serialized as SPARQL JSON, the score is almost always 0, unless the output of the queries is exactly the same string**.

If r**eference_output_media_type is "application/sparql-results+json"**, then if the reference output can't be parsed, this means there is a bug, and the score is 0. **If the results can be parsed, and the actual query is a SELECT/ASK query, which output can be parsed  we do:**
- **If the reference query is ASK query**
  - **If the actual query is ASK query, the score is 0, if the boolean values don't match, and 1 otherwise**
  - 0 otherwise
- **If the reference query is SELECT query**
  - If the actual query is not SELECT query, the score is 0
  - **Otherwise continue with this logic "If the reference result has n columns .."**

Author: Added a modified version of this. How does it look?

$$

where:

- $\text{rows}$ = the set of rows in the actual result
- $\text{cols}_\text{ref}$ = the set of columns in the reference result
- $\text{cols}_\text{act}$ = the set of columns in the actual result

## Steps score

`steps_score` is a metric of the overall correctness of the steps the agent
executed to respond to the user's query. It can be used to understand how to
improve the agent.

`steps_score` is a real number in the interval [0, 1] which indicates how
closely the actual steps match the reference steps. A score of 1 indicates a
perfect match.

`steps_score` is computed as the macro mean of scores of individual steps over
the reference steps groups. That is, it is the sum of reference groups scores
divided by the number of groups. Each group score is the sum of scores of its
matching steps divided by the number of steps in the group:

$$
\text{steps\\_score} = \frac{1}{|G|} \sum_{g \in G} \left( \frac{1}{|g|} \sum_{m \in \text{matches}(g)} \text{score}(m) \right)
$$

where:

- $G$ = the set of reference groups
- $|g|$ = the number of steps in group $g \in G$

> - $T$ = the sequence of actual steps $ \langle t_1, t_2, ... \ringle $

Reviewer: This is rendered badly

<img width="725" height="35" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/12b253a1-1db2-41bd-bb97-e24a41f1c2d0" />

Author: Fixed

> # Steps evaluation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Steps
          
A step represents a discrete tool operation required for the agent to answer a user prompt. Examples include _vector store queries_, _SPARQL queries_, _IRI discovery_, _code writing_, and _interpreter calls_. Depending on the task, these tools may require strict sequential execution or permit an arbitrary order. To support flexible evaluation workflows, all execution steps are structurally wrapped into [groups](#groups).

# Groups
            
A group consists of a set of steps that can be executed in any order. If strict sequential execution is required, each step must be placed in a separate group. Conversely, if all steps are unordered, they can be consolidated into a single group. All steps must be encapsulated within groups, and the sequence of these groups defines the overall execution order. Step grouping is applicable solely to the reference dataset (see the illustration bellow).

<p align="center">
<img alt="Steps matching" src="images/steps-matching.png" width="400">
</p>

A sample reference dataset can be found [here](https://github.com/Ontotext-AD/graphrag-eval/blob/main/docs/examples/reference.yaml)

# Steps evaluation
```

> If a reference answer specifies reference steps and the target answer specifies the actual steps taken by the target agent, then the library tries to match steps in the two sets and computes match scores ([§ Steps matching](#steps-matching)). It outputs the matches and an overall `steps_score` for the question ([§ Steps score](#steps-score)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Within the QA dataset, reference steps outlining the context and tool orchestration needed to derive the correct response can accompany the reference answer. If both the reference steps and the target agent's empirical steps are available, the library aligns the two sets to compute match scores. ([§ Steps matching](#steps-matching)). It outputs the matches and an overall `steps_score` for the question ([§ Steps score](#steps-score)).
```

> The matches are also used to compute quality metrics for "retrieval" steps if the necessary input variables are supplied ([§ Metrics](https://github.com/Ontotext-AD/graphrag-eval/blob/main/docs/metrics.md)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The matches are used to compute quality metrics ([§ Metrics](https://github.com/Ontotext-AD/graphrag-eval/blob/main/docs/metrics.md)) for "retrieval" steps, if the necessary input variables are supplied .
```

> The reference can specify some constraints on step execution order. Specifically, reference steps are specified as an ordered list of "groups", while each group is not ordered, as illustrated below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> <p align="center">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> <img alt="Steps matching" src="images/steps-matching.png" width="400">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> </p>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Steps matching

> Matching considers only actual steps with `status == "success"`. The library tries to match steps in reference groups to actual steps, such that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Matching considers only actual steps which were successfully executed by the agent (`status == "success"`). The library tries to match steps in reference groups to actual steps, such that:
```

- Each reference step matches a unique actual step
- The actual step was successful (i.e., it didn’t result in an error)
- The actual step occurred before all steps matching later groups

>   - Within a reference group, actual steps can be matched regardless of the order in which they were executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Steps within a reference group can match actual steps in any order.
```

 
The matching algorithm is as follows:

- Examine reference groups and actual steps in reverse order

> - If all steps in the group are matched, then proceed to the previous group, matching actual steps executed before the earliest actual step already matched for the current group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If all steps in the group are matched, then proceed to the previous group, matching actual steps executed before the earliest actual step already matched.
```

> - If some steps in the group are not matched, then stop matching and compute the score from the matches found so far.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If all steps in the group are visited, then stop matching and compute the score from the matches found so far.
```

The output contains section `reference_steps` structured as the input `reference_steps`. Each matched reference step includes the additional key `matches` (string) containing `<actual_step.id>` of the matching actual step.

## Match score

> The match score quantifies how well a reference step aligns with an actual step, and is used in computing the overall `steps_score`. Scores are 0 (no match) or 1 (full match), except for "retrieval" steps, where scores range between 0 and 1. A score greater than 0 indicates at least a partial match.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The match score quantifies how well a reference step aligns with an actual step, and is used in computing the overall `steps_score` ([§ Steps score](#steps-score)). Match scores for most tool calls are 0 (no match) or 1 (full match), except for "retrieval" steps, where scores range between 0 and 1. A score greater than 0 indicates at least a partial match.
```

> The match score is determined by the first rule that applies:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The match score is determined by the first rule of the following that applies. For definition of the variables used in the rules, see ([§ Reference Q&A data](https://github.com/Ontotext-AD/graphrag-eval/blob/main/docs/input.md#reference-qa-data)).
```

  - For each subset and for each column in it, look for its matching reference column by comparing each reference column listed under `required_columns`
    - Two columns match if all rows have matching values
      - Floating-point numbers must match up to 8 decimal points
      - Text values and special types such as duration must match exactly
- If both queries are `ASK`:
  - If the reference `output_media_type` is `application/sparql-results+json` and the outputs can be parsed as JSON:
    - the output boolean values must equal
- In all other cases (e.g., `DESCRIBE` queries, `output_media_type` is not `application/sparql-results+json`, actual output cannot be parsed as JSON):
    - output strings must be identical

The algorithm has average time complexity

$$
O(|\text{rows}| \cdot { |\text{cols}_{\text{ref}}| }! \cdot \binom{|\text{cols}_{\text{act}}|}{|\text{cols}_{\text{ref}}|})
$$

where:

- $\text{rows}$ = the set of rows in the actual result
- $\text{cols}_\text{ref}$ = the set of columns in the reference result
- $\text{cols}_\text{act}$ = the set of columns in the actual result

## Steps score

> `steps_score` is a metric of the overall correctness of the steps the agent executed to respond to the user's query. It can be used to understand how to improve the agent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`steps_score` metric evaluates the overall correctness of the agent's steps against the QA dataset's reference steps. These are the steps the agent executes to respond to the user's query. `steps_score` can be used to understand how to improve the agent.
```

`steps_score` is a real number in the interval [0, 1] which indicates how closely the actual steps match the reference steps. A score of 1 indicates a perfect match.

> `steps_score` is computed as the macro mean of [match scores](#match-score) taken over the reference groups. That is, it is the sum of reference groups scores divided by the number of groups; each group score is the sum of scores of its matching steps divided by the number of steps in the group:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`steps_score` is computed as the macro mean of [match scores](#match-score) taken over the reference [groups](#groups). That is, it is the sum of reference groups scores divided by the number of groups; each group score is the sum of scores of its matching steps divided by the number of steps in the group:
```

$$

> \text{steps\\_score} = \frac{1}{|G|} \sum_{g \in G} \left( \frac{1}{|g|} \sum_{m \in \text{matches}(g)} \text{score}(m) \right)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\text{steps\\_score} = \frac{1}{|G|} \sum_{g \in G} \left( \frac{1}{|g|} \sum_{m \in \text{M}(g)} \text{score}(m) \right)
```

$$

where:

- $G$ = the set of reference groups
- $|g|$ = the number of steps in group $g \in G$
- $T$ = the sequence of actual steps $\langle t_1, t_2, ... \rangle$
- $\text{score}(\langle s, t \rangle)$ = the `match_score` of $s \in g$ with
actual step $t \in T$

> - $\text{matches}(g)$ = $\\{ \langle s, t \rangle \mid s \in g, t \in T, \text{score}(\langle s, t \rangle) > 0 \\}$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- $\text{M}(g)$ = $\\{ \langle s, t \rangle \mid s \in g, t \in T, \text{matches with score}(\langle s, t \rangle) > 0 \\}$
```
